---
layout: post
author: jeff_admin
title: What's the Deal with Kombucha?
featured: false
hidden: true
tags:  [brewing,diet,kombucha,lifestyle,organic,activity,hobby,home,probiotics,supplements]
categories: [knowledge]
image: assets/images/posts/knowledge//KN-461-banner.jpg
permalink: whats-deal-kombucha
postnum: 461
intro: Kombucha is exploding in popularity due to its probiotic health benefits, as long as you make it correctly.
---

<sup>by Jeff Milton, ThirdAge.Life contributor</sup>

I was first introduced to kombucha in Buenos Aires when I was living in a room that was attached to an organic restaurant. The women who ran the secret (i.e. illegal) restaurant had bottles of yellow juice fermenting on the shelves all the time. I asked her what they were, and she excitedly replied said 'This is kombucha! It's good for everything!"

I had never heard of it before, but if it was "good for everything" clearly, I would learn more, as "everything" was exactly when I needed to fix in my body.

So I did a little research. Indeed, it is a miracle elixir goof for "everything", at least according to some4. According to others, it is a potentially lethal dose of fermented fungus that has no proven benefits.

Here is what I learned...

Firstoff off, what IS kombucha? According to Wikipedia "Kombucha is a fermented, slightly alcoholic, lightly effervescent, sweetened black or green tea drink commonly intended as a functional beverage for its supposed health benefits. Sometimes the beverage is called kombucha tea to distinguish the name from the kombucha culture of bacteria and yeast."[1]. Apparently, it has been used for thousands of years.

## The Good

_NOTE: Most of the "good" info has been distilled from [8 Evidence-Based Health Benefits of Kombucha Tea](https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/8-benefits-of-kombucha-tea). I recommend reading that article, as it has more links and more info._

Kombucha contains a large number of probiotic bacteria that or produced during fermentation [1]. These probiotics are said to be very beneficial for your gut bacteria, which improves digestion, inflammation, weight loss and many other aspects of health.

Kombucha (when made with Green Tea), has many of the same benefits as Green Tea, such as antioxidants and other bioactive compounds, such as polyphenols. If we apply the benefits of Gree Tea to Kambucha, then it could help reduce belly fat, improve cholesterol levels, help with blood sugar control and more [2][3][4][5]. For me, this is more of an argument to start drinking Green Tea, however, kombucha ha seems to have some of its own antioxidants effects, as shown in studies that reduced liver toxicity in rats by up to 70% [6][7][8][9]

Due to the fermentation, kombucha creates a lot of acetic acids, and this is able to kill many potentially harmful microorganisms[10] including infection-causing bacteria and yeasts. t is worth noting that this same effect can be achieved by drinking a bit of apple cider vinegar.

The antimicrobial effects of kombucha (and perhaps vinegar as well), although known to suppress the growth of undesirable bacteria and yeast, has not actually been shown to have any clear benefits, even though it seems kind of obvious that it should.

Kambuc has been shown to greatly improve cholesterol level within 30 days [11][12], at least in normal and diabetic rats. I wish they would start doing some human testing! However, Green Tea drinkers have up to 31% lower risk of developing heart disease, so these kombucha effects may simply be the Green Tea effects via kombucha.[13][14][15].

The same applies to the beneficial effects of kombucha on type 2 diabetes as many of its benefits, such as reducing blood sugar level by slowing the metabolism of carbs, are also found to exist in greet tea. In fact, Green tea drinkers showed an 18% lower risk of becoming diabetic [16]. As a coffee drinker, I was happy to see that the report also showed that "every additional cup of coffee consumed in a day was associated with a 7% reduction in the excess risk of diabetes".

There have even been claims that kombucha can cure cancer! This claim has raised the ire of skeptics and nay-sayers to the point of accusing kombucha advocates of being criminally negligent in the claims. What the science shows is that in a test tube kombucha helped prevent the growth of cancerous cells due to the high concentrations of polyphenols and antioxidants [17][18], so it can be said that technically;y, kombucha helps reduce cancer cells in a test tube... that may or may not be a far cry from cancer cells in the human body. Still, it is worth noting that the active ingredients that suppress cancer cell growth also exist in green tea. Ironically, it is polyphenol's promotion of cell death (along with it's blocking of gene mutations) that helps suppress cancer cell growth, kind of like a form of organic chemotherapy.[19].

OK, so all-in-all, Green tea kombucha sounds like a pretty good tonic; all the benefits of green tea with added probiotic goodies.

## The Bad

There are many papers challenging the above claims that are published in the same journals and institutions that published the claims, to begin with. Science is starting to sound like politics! For example, in the paper [Kombucha: a systematic review of the clinical evidence](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK69654/) where "The author concluded that the claimed benefits of Kombucha were not supported by clinical evidence and, in view of the adverse events profile, its therapeutic use could not be recommended."

The Mayo Clinic published an article [What is kombucha tea? Does it have any health benefits?](https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/consumer-health/expert-answers/kombucha-tea/faq-20058126) that was not that glowing, with statements like:

* These claims [ that kombucha tea helps prevent and manage serious health conditions] are not backed by science.
* Limited evidence suggests kombucha tea may offer benefits similar to probiotic supplements.
* There have been reports of adverse effects, such as stomach upset, infections and allergic reactions in kombucha tea drinkers. Kombucha tea is often brewed in homes under nonsterile conditions, making contamination likely.
* ...several cases of harm have been reported.

Cleary, the Mayo Clinic is not a fan. Nor is the American Cancer Society, who state "Serious side effects and occasional deaths have been associated with drinking Kombucha tea" [20]. In fact, I could list medical institution after medical institution that warns people away from kombucha.

At this point, I need to disclose that I am not so keen to accept blanket advice or warnings from modern allopathic medical institutions. When we see mountains of evidence that eating meat is associated with cancer, and then we see the American Cancer Institute recommending people eat meat, it has to raise some serious doubts as to the efficacy of their mission and advice.

In general, it's safe to say that modern allopathic, primarily pharma-backed medical research and knowledge, is one perspective on health, and has contributed greatly to the humanity's quality of life, but it certainly is not the only perspective on health. One need only look at the Hunza people of northern Pakistan, who live to 120, bear children up to the age of 60, only drink apricot juice for three months out of the year, bathe in glacier water, and are cancer-free. Or the island of Ikaria, 99 square miles and home to almost 10,000 Greek nationals that lies about 30 miles off the western coast of Turkey. Apparently, all the inhabitants live a very long and healthy life, and even sick people, like 6-months-to-live cancer patients, who go to this island are magically cured.[21]

The point being, it is in one's best interest to look at all perspectives, even the ones that tell you to ignore the others.

## The Ugly

There has been some bad news around kombucha, even some deaths. However, most of these can be attributed to unsanitary conditions in which the kombucha was grown or stored. There can be many reasons why things can go wrong, not only with kombucha but with any drugs, even the most benign. Three thousand people die each year from common aspirin. Saint John's Wort, when taken with certain foods, such as anything fermented or nuts, can have permanently debilitating side effects in the brain. In short, anything and everything is deadly in some form, at some point.

Conclusion
From an objective perspective, it seems like kombucha, when properly made, has legitimate health benefits ranging from potentially huge to slightly odd, such as [making your teeth feel amazing](https://www.goodhousekeeping.com/health/diet-nutrition/a20705895/kombucha-health-benefits/). The one caveat is simply "do your homework,", and I will make the bold assertions that this applies to every aspect of life.

Footnotes:

[1] [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kombucha](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kombucha)

[2] Efficacy of a green tea extract rich in catechin polyphenols and caffeine in increasing 24-h energy expenditure and fat oxidation in humans

[3] A green tea extract high in catechins reduces body fat and cardiovascular risks in humans

[4] Antihypercholesterolemic effect of Chinese black tea extract in human subjects with borderline hypercholesterolemia

[5] Effect of green tea on glucose control and insulin sensitivity: a meta-analysis of 17 randomized controlled trials

[6] Hepatoprotective and curative properties of Kombucha tea against carbon tetrachloride-induced toxicity

[7] Lead induced oxidative stress: beneficial effects of Kombucha tea

[8] Studies on toxicity, anti-stress and hepato-protective properties of Kombucha tea

[9] Hepatoprotective properties of kombucha tea against TBHP-induced oxidative stress via suppression of mitochondria-dependent apoptosis

[10] Kombucha fermentation and its antimicrobial activity

[11] Hypoglycemic and antilipidemic properties of kombucha tea in alloxan-induced diabetic rats

[12] Protective effect of kombucha on rats fed a hypercholesterolemic diet is mediated by its antioxidant activity

[13] The relation between green tea consumption and cardiovascular disease as evidenced by epidemiological studies

[14] Dietary patterns and cardiovascular disease mortality in Japan: a prospective cohort study

[15] Does tea affect cardiovascular disease? A meta-analysis

[16] Coffee, decaffeinated coffee, and tea consumption in relation to incident type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review with meta-analysis

[17] Antiproliferative and antimicrobial activity of traditional Kombucha and Satureja montana L. Kombucha

[18] Downregulation of signaling molecules involved in angiogenesis of prostate cancer cell line (PC-3) by kombucha (lyophilized)

[19] A Review on Kombucha Tea—Microbiology, Composition, Fermentation, Beneficial Effects, Toxicity, and Tea Fungus

[20] Russell J, Rovere A, eds. (2009). "Kombucha Tea". American Cancer Society Complete Guide to Complementary and Alternative Cancer Therapies (2nd ed.). American Cancer Society. pp. 629–633. ISBN 9780944235713. Serious side effects and occasional deaths have been associated with drinking Kombucha tea

[21] [https://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/28/magazine/the-island-where-people-forget-to-die.html](https://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/28/magazine/the-island-where-people-forget-to-die.html)
