---
layout: post
author: jeff_admin
title: No More Cold Feet
featured: false
hidden: true
tags:  [body,cold,feet,musculoskeletal,therapy,video]
categories: [knowledge]
image: assets/images/posts/knowledge//KN-2898-banner.jpg
permalink: no-more-cold-feet
postnum: 2898
intro: Cold feet are very unpleasant, and not to be ignored.
---
OK, I'll admit this title is click-bait, but not totally, as I share a technique that is guaranteed to have some effect in reducing your feet feeling.

I started looking into how to fix the problem of perpetually cold feet when I was young after a bout of frostbite that left me with nerve damage, which was the major contributor to my ice-cube-like feet.

One of the folk remedies I tried was soaking the feet on cod liver oil for 2 days!  That was a mess, and I can't say with any certainty it did anything...  what a surprise :/

Before we get into specifics, I feel obliged to state the obvious... which is... (bad) diet, (little to no) exercise, (excess) stress, smoking, low blood pressure, (too much) drinking...  these are the low-hanging fruits on the "how to improve your circulation" tree.

If you've attended to the above, and you still have cold feet, then read on.

The first thing to consider is if you have any illnesses that might be causing cold feet.  Some of these are...

* Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid)
* Diabetes
* Arteriosclerosis
* Peripheral vascular disease
* Raynaud's phenomenon
* Neuropathy

Do you have any other related symptoms that might indicate there is another problem that needs attention?  For example...

* Pain
* Numbness
* Changes in skin color
* Pins and needles tingling sensation

If you answered yes to any of the above, or have no idea if they apply, then your best bet is to get a checkup and scratch them off the list, or fix them.

### Practical Tips

If your feet are cold because it's cold outside, then you should read "[10 Ways to Keep Your Feet Warm in Cold Weather](https://www.verywellfit.com/ways-to-keep-feet-warm-cold-weather-walk-3435230)"

### Hot and Cold

One of the main causes of cold feet is a lack of circulation.  Applying heat to your feet is the obvious remedy, but heat alone is actually not the best option as it can increase varicose veins, phlebitis, inflammation, thrombosis, fluid retention, and oxygen deprivation, as well as other not-so-great side effects.

but there is another option as well... freezing cold!  

The body is really, really smart when it comes to survival, and one thing it has learned to deal with is the cold.  After all, homo-sapiens evolved during the last ice age, which only ended about 11,000 years ago, so we are well equipped to deal with the cold.

We already know that limited exposure to cold has tremendous benefits, such as normalizing blood pressure. reducing cholesterol, improving circulation, reducing swelling and pain, and lot more, but there is another long term benefit to exposure to cold.

When you expose your body to the cold, the body, thinking it has been transported to the Arctic, even for only a few minutes day, will take immediate action and kick itself into a super-survival mode, which is the reason for many of the benefits of cold therapy.  But it also begins to take preemptive steps for long term survival, and one of the steps it takes is to make the blood vessels larger, creates new capillaries1, and strengthens the blood vessel walls, all to increase blood to the cold parts.  

In fact, this is why white people blush and have 'rosy' cheeks, because, as they lived in colder regions the body needed to provide more blood to the face to keep it from freezing.

The key to this therapy is to alternate between hot and cold.  This is called Contrast Hydrotherapy (CH) and is commonly used for swelling, pain, muscle injuries, and many other musculoskeletal, circulatory. and immunological issues.

In CH studies they typically use temperatures of 36C (97F)for hot water and 12 degrees centigrade (53 Fahrenheit) for cold, but personally, I prefer much hotter and colder.  Adjust to your own levels of tolerance.

The process typically is, start with hot water for no longer than 10 minutes, then switch to cold water, also no longer than 10 minutes.  Repeat this cycle about 6 times.  I prefer (and it is recommended) to end after a cold footbath rather than hot.

I have not seen any studies on CH specifically for the feet, but CH studies do exist, and we can reasonably apply many of these same results to the feet, even if we are not sure exactly why CH works.

In one study where they studied cardiovascular, respiratory, nervous,  musculoskeletal,  gastrointestinal, genitourinary, hematology/immunology, and endocrine/hormonal systems, as well as eye, skin, and hair,  they concluded...

>Based on available literature, this review suggests that **hydrotherapy was widely used to improve immunity and for the management of pain**, [congestive heart failure, myocardial infarction], chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, asthma, [Parkinsons disease, ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatoid arthritis , osteoarthritis of knee, fibromyalgia syndrome], anorectal disorders, fatigue, anxiety, obesity, hypercholesterolemia, hyperthermia, labor, etc. It produces different effects on various systems of the body depending on the temperature of water and though these effects are scientifically evidence-based, **there is lack of evidence for the mechanism on how hydrotherapy improves these diseases**, which is one of the limitations of hydrotherapy, and further studies are required to find the mechanism of hydrotherapy on various diseases. _-- Scientific Evidence-Based Effects of Hydrotherapy on Various Systems of the Body_


### Thyroid Related

There is also a technique to warm up your hand and feet by activating your thyroid, assuming you do not suffer from serious thyroid issues, of course.

{% youtube "https://www.youtube.com/embed/2DnaljPchA8" %}

#### _Thyroid Technique for Cold Hands and Feet: Dr. Berg shares how to warm up your hands and feel using acupressure to the thyroid. In this video, Dr. Berg explains how this technique work and ensures it is not a cure for thyroid disease._

If you don't know anything about the thyroid, check out this video below.

{% youtube "https://www.youtube.com/embed/4koooXfskJQ" %}
#### _Hypo and Hyper Thyroid Simplified: There are some key differences between hypo and hyper thyroid, and for that matter all glands. You have a feedback mechanism that controls things called negative and positive. Negative feedback occurs when the gland creates the effect and the signal is sent back turning off the gland. This can be applied to hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, Hashimoto's, Graves and many other types of conditions._

_References_

* [1] It is unclear whether angiogenesis, the creation of new capillaries, occurs in the foot, but it does occur in the lower leg. [See "Factors Regulating Arteriogenesis"](https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1161/01.ATV.0000069625.11230.96)

### Other related studies

* [Post exercise ice water immersion: Is it a form of active recovery?](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2938508/)
* [Effect of Immediate and Delayed Cold Water Immersion After a High Intensity Exercise Session on Subsequent Run Performance](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3761518/)
* [Improved Circulation & Lymphatics](https://drjockers.com/cold-showers/)
* [Effect of cold water immersion on blood lactate levels of table tennis](http://www.ijcrar.com/vol-2-9/Miad%20Mokayef,%20et%20al.pdf)
