---
layout: post
author: jeff_admin
title: Power Foods for the Brain
featured: false
hidden: true
tags:  [body,brain,lifestyle,mind,food,health,video]
categories: [knowledge]
image: assets/images/posts/knowledge//KN-467-banner.jpg
permalink: healthy-aging-promoting-well-being-older-adults
postnum: 467
intro: Barnard, a groundbreaking expert on diet, shares his wisdom on food and the brain.
---

Dr. Barnard has led numerous research studies investigating the effects of diet on diabetes, body weight, and chronic pain, including a groundbreaking study of dietary interventions in type 2 diabetes, funded by the National Institutes of Health. Dr. Barnard has authored over 70 scientific publications as well as 17 books. As president of the Physicians Committee, Dr. Barnard leads programs advocating for preventive medicine, good nutrition, and higher ethical standards in research. He has hosted three PBS television programs on nutrition and health and is frequently called on by news programs to discuss issues related to nutrition and research. Originally from Fargo, North Dakota, Dr. Barnard received his M.D. degree at the George Washington University School of Medicine and completed his residency at the same institution. He practiced at St. Vincent’s Hospital in New York before returning to Washington to found the Physicians Committee.

Summary of the video
- Eat less saturated fat (meat, milk products, etc.)
- Consume more antioxidants ( e.g. vitamin E will take care of free radicals)
- Eat more anthocyanins (e.g. fruits of different colors)
- Take a walk regularly (recommended 3 times in a week). Hippocampus will work much better.

{% youtube "https://www.youtube.com/embed/v_ONFix_e4k" %}

#### _Power Foods for the Brain: Dr. Barnard has led numerous research studies investigating the effects of diet on diabetes, body weight, and chronic pain, including a groundbreaking study of dietary interventions in type 2 diabetes, funded by the National Institutes of Health. Dr. Barnard has authored over 70 scientific publications as well as 17 books. As president of the Physicians Committee, Dr. Barnard leads programs advocating for preventive medicine, good nutrition, and higher ethical standards in research. He has hosted three PBS television programs on nutrition and health and is frequently called on by news programs to discuss issues related to nutrition and research. Originally from Fargo, North Dakota, Dr. Barnard received his M.D. degree at the George Washington University School of Medicine and completed his residency at the same institution. He practiced at St. Vincent’s Hospital in New York before returning to Washington to found the Physicians Committee._
