---
layout: post
author: jeff_admin
title: Essential Oils for Sleep
featured: false
hidden: true
tags:  [lifestyle,sleep,comfort,supplements,video]
permalink: essential-oils-sleep
categories: [knowledge]
image: assets/images/posts/knowledge//KN-322-banner.jpg
postnum: 322
intro: Your sense of smell has a profound effect on yourt body, emotions, and mind.
---
# Essential oils really can help you sleep.

{% youtube "https://www.youtube.com/embed/6RfQkn1tJUk" %}

#### _Main Essential Oils for Sleep_

1) **Lavender** - Most popular and used for thousands of years throughout history in Jewish and Chinese medicine. Contains compounds to relax the body and help your body wind down at night. It is the #1 oil for people struggling with insomnia.

2) **Roman Chamomile** - Helps the brain and digestive system to relax. Helps with abdominal cramping, IBS symptoms, and reduces symptoms of leaky gut.

3) **Vetiver** - Works directly on the nervous system and good for neurological conditions such as dementia, ADHD or autism. Vetiver calms the body and the nerves.

_Essential Oil Blend for Bedtime_

- 2 drops Lavender
- 2 drops Roman Chamomile
- 1 drop Vetiver

_Rub on neck, forehead or nose to breathe in vapors or diffuse before going to bed._

Other Essential Oils to help with sleep:

1) **Ylang Ylang** - Floral oil, natural aphrodisiac that improves mood and helps with emotions

2) **Orange** - Helps release stress and tension

3) **Vanilla** - Improves and boosts mood

_This content is strictly the opinion of Dr. Josh Axe, and is for informational and educational purposes only. It is not intended to provide medical advice or to take the place of medical advice or treatment from a personal physician. All viewers of this content are advised to consult their doctors or qualified health professionals regarding specific health questions. Neither Dr. Axe nor the publisher of this content takes responsibility for possible health consequences of any person or persons reading or following the information in this educational content. All viewers of this content, especially those taking prescription or over-the-counter medications, should consult their physicians before beginning any nutrition, supplement or lifestyle program._
