---
layout: post
author: jeff_admin
title: Healthy Aging -  Oral Health for Older Adults
featured: false
hidden: true
tags:  [thirdagers,body,health,hygiene,lifestyle,oral,care]
categories: [knowledge]
image: assets/images/posts/knowledge//KN-465-banner.jpg
permalink: healthy-aging-oral-health-older-adults
postnum: 465
intro: To protect your teeth in your 70s and beyond, start now.
---

Teeth are amazing.  They are living fossils that carry the legacy of our evolution, but I often wonder how our hunter-gatherer ancestors dealt with toothaches, especially in light of the reality of dental health just 100 years ago.   Perhaps no part of the body is a hard, and yet, as sensitive, as the teeth.

Fortunately, we do not have to suffer the fate of our less dental-savey predecessors because we know how to take care of our teeth now more than any time in human history.  

Here are some articles that will help.

## Healthy Aging: Oral Health for Older Adults
In the past, losing teeth and getting dentures was considered an almost-inevitable part of aging. Those days are over. Intact teeth, [healthy gums](https://health.usnews.com/health-news/patient-advice/articles/2016-06-15/healthy-teeth-habits-dental-hygienists-swear-by) and pain-free smiles are what older adults should expect as they maintain [good oral hygiene](https://health.usnews.com/health-news/patient-advice/articles/2016-06-15/healthy-teeth-habits-dental-hygienists-swear-by) and get regular dental care.

Some seniors may find it harder to brush thoroughly and take care of their teeth than they used to. But with age, good oral health is key to avoiding gum disease, preserving function and allowing people to [eat well](https://health.usnews.com/health-news/health-wellness/articles/2016-01-05/eating-for-your-brain-as-a-senior). Below, dental experts describe potential issues, nifty devices and affordable resources for seniors and [caregivers](https://health.usnews.com/health-news/patient-advice/articles/2016-05-20/deciding-to-be-a-caregiver-for-someone-you-love) to keep teeth healthy.

## Mouth of a 45-Year-Old
Among most baby boomers, dental self-care comes naturally. "For this this group, losing their teeth is not a consideration," says geriatric dentist [Dr. Elisa Ghezzi](http://www.voiagedental.com/about-dr-elisa-ghezzi.html), a past chair of the Coalition for Oral Health for the Aging. "They're not going to. And they're people who've grown up pretty recently educated that you should go regularly to get your teeth cleaned, that you should use a fluoridated toothpaste."

Baby boomers have a preventive advantage, says Ghezzi, the owner of Voiage Dental, a mobile private practice offering dental care to residents in [long-term care facilities](https://health.usnews.com/best-nursing-homes) in eastern Michigan. "Unlike kids these days, [baby boomers] drank out of drinking fountains that had fluoride in them." You can't gauge somebody's age by looking at their teeth, she says, adding that she's told 85-year-old patients that if she showed their X-rays to another dentist, the dentist would think the images belonged to someone who was 45.

"When was the last time you had your teeth cleaned?" is a key question Ghezzi asks new patients or their family members. "That tells me the last time you were in for regular preventive care," she says. "That's what matters so much."

## Debunking Senior Dental Myths
Common misconceptions about aging teeth can act as barriers to the best dental self-care. Keep the following recommendations in mind:

**Cavities aren't just for kids.** Evidence is clear that loss of teeth, or edentulism, is decreasing among older Americans, says [Dr. Renée Joskow](http://www.nhpf.org/speakerbio_reneejoskow), the chief dental officer with the Health Resources and Services Administration. "People are retaining their teeth and keeping them longer," she says. Therefore, they could be at risk for cavities, she adds. "It doesn't mean that's automatic," she says. "If you're taking care of your teeth, we can prevent cavities."

**Don't wait for pain.** Waiting for patients to start complaining of pain before doing root-surface procedures isn't a good approach for older adults in their 70s and beyond, says Ghezzi, who is also an adjunct clinical assistant professor at the University of Michigan School of Dentistry. Pain perception changes with age, she says, and a problem that would send a 40-year-old screaming to their dentist might not register with someone who's 75. Similarly, older patients might put off needed care, not realizing that pain is a sign of an underlying problem. But waiting until it really hurts could lead to tooth loss and costly reconstructive work, she says.

**Teeth shouldn't soften.** It's not true that teeth naturally become softer with age. "If you have bone loss, you have periodontal disease or your teeth are breaking up because there's decay," Ghezzi says.

**Gum bleeding? Don't stop brushing.** Bleeding gums are a sign of infection and an indication that oral hygiene isn't ideal, Ghezzi says. Caregivers may be reluctant to brush people's teeth when bleeding occurs, she notes. However, she says, "It's going to bleed when you start – keep cleaning until it stops and gets healthy again."

**Nutrition suffers with dental problems.** It's a myth that missing teeth or faulty dentures make people eat less, Ghezzi says. Instead, they choose softer foods like doughnuts and avoid [healthier choices](https://health.usnews.com/wellness/food/articles/2017-01-04/what-is-the-best-diet-for-you) like salads, raw carrots and apples. When loose lower dentures impair function, she says, implants help clasp them in place. Strategically located implants to replace missing teeth can allow better chewing, she says, so people eat in a [more nutritious](https://health.usnews.com/health-news/health-wellness/articles/2015/09/16/malnutrition-its-not-always-what-you-think) way.

## Body-Mouth Connection
"You can't have good overall health without dental health," Joskow says. Just as an infected cut on your finger can introduce bacteria into the blood stream, infection from gum disease also can spread. "The mouth is the entrance to your gut and other parts of the body," she says. "And we have been learning more from the science and research [about] the connection between chronic conditions like diabetes and the oral health of that individual." People [with diabetes](https://health.usnews.com/best-diet/best-diabetes-diets) are more likely to have periodontal disease, Ghezzi says: "They definitely need to be seen more frequently for cleanings and monitoring."

Dental exams can uncover certain medical conditions, Joskow says. Diagnostic tools like X-rays and a methodical screening process, including a head and neck exam, may locate cancerous and noncancerous growths. A dental exam can also catch systemic problems like a blood disorder. According to the American Cancer Society, 62 is the average age for most people diagnosed with mouth, throat and tongue cancer.

Older adults may see prescriptions pile up, and some medications lead to dry mouth. "If you notice a couple months after you start a new medication your mouth getting drier, do not do anything except drink water to fix it," Ghezzi says. "Do not suck on candies. Do not drink more coffees and teas with sugar in them. When you are constantly exposed to sugar throughout a day, then you're going to increase your [cavity] risk." Talk to your doctor about [adjusting medications](https://health.usnews.com/health-news/patient-advice/slideshows/how-to-help-aging-parents-manage-medications).

When brushing and flossing get harder for patients, Ghezzi says, she sees plaque build along their gum lines and food get caught in their teeth. Easy-to-use dental devices can make up for reduced manual dexterity and improve patients' ability to keep teeth clean.

Interdental brushes, which look like small tube brushes, provide a good alternative to flossing. (They are also helpful for [people with braces](https://health.usnews.com/wellness/articles/2016-07-27/braces-for-adults-are-they-right-for-you).) Water flossers are another option, as well as sonic electric toothbrushes, which vibrate the plaque from your teeth.

Medicare does not cover most dental care, including dental procedures, cleanings, fillings, tooth extractions, dentures, dental plates or other dental devices. Seniors concerned about seeking dental care because they can't afford it "have other means to get the care they need," Joskow says. "HRSA community health centers provide care to anyone in need regardless of their ability to pay." Click on the Human Resources and Services Administration locator to find the [HRSA-funded program](https://findahealthcenter.hrsa.gov/) nearest you. For dental-care information, the [Wisdom Tooth Project](http://www.toothwisdom.org/) focuses on the needs of older adults.

_From: [https://health.usnews.com/wellness/aging-well/articles/2017-01-13/healthy-aging-oral-health-for-older-adults](https://health.usnews.com/wellness/aging-well/articles/2017-01-13/healthy-aging-oral-health-for-older-adults)_

##The Psychology of Flossing: How to Make It a Habit for Good
By: Mark Burhenne DDS

Why is it so tough to remember to floss? I rarely run into a patient who can’t remember to brush their teeth twice a day, but even the most conscientious among us come to their hygiene appointment anxious and awaiting the hygienist’s lecture about flossing.

Flossing can be icky and awkward — no one likes feeling like they’re shoving their entire fist into their mouth. But the reason why we don’t make flossing a habit is a bit more complicated and has its roots in psychology.

During the early 1900s, right around World War I, dental hygiene was so bad, it was said to be a national security risk. Why? People weren’t brushing their teeth, of course, and the 1900s marks the period when Americans first began to consume sugary, ready to eat processed foods in the form of crackers, breads, and potato chips.

America’s brushing habits were forever changed at this point by a toothpaste campaign that told people, “Just run your tongue across your teeth. You’ll feel a film — that’s what makes your teeth look ‘off colour’ and invites decay. Why would you keep a dingy film on your teeth? Our toothpaste removes the film!”

As Charles Duhigg explains in his book, The Power of Habit, the success of this campaign was in its ability to create a craving in people, which is at the heart of all habits.

In order to make a habit, Duhigg asserts, you need the following:

- A simple and obvious cue
- A clearly defined reward

When people ran their tongue across their teeth like the campaign instructed, that became a simple and obvious cue for them to brush their teeth. The reward? Removing the “dingy film” on their teeth. The ad people had created a craving. If people forgot to brush, they missed that “tingling clean feeling.”

Now, back to flossing. The problem with flossing is there is no instant gratification, no clearly defined reward. People don’t think it’s working.

Unfortunately, our brains are not wired to develop habits that will do good things for our health 10 or 20 years later.

Flossing is going to prevent decay, keep your teeth and smile looking young as you age, prevent your teeth from falling out, prevent gum recession, expensive dental bills, and pain — so trick your brain into making it an effortless routine that you perform on autopilot.

Start with giving yourself a simple and obvious cue — you might decide to floss every night before bed, for example — and a clearly defined reward, like a favorite flavor of floss. For children, a sticker for every day on a flossing calendar in the bathroom is a great way to cement the habit.

**Create a cue.** I tell my patients to take a blank post-it and stick it on your mirror. That’s a cue. Don’t write things like “floss” on it — that sounds too authoritarian and disciplinary. Every time you see that post-it, you’ll know deep down, that means to floss. I did this to get into the habit myself.

**Make it easy.** Keep floss stashed everywhere. The samples of floss you get from the dentist are great for this — keep one in your desk drawer at work, your gym bag, in the car, in your laptop bag, and your travel toiletry case. We might not think of flossing late at night before bed because we’re tired, but the thought (or craving) could hit you during the day.

**Invest in a [flossing stick](https://askthedentist.com/hate-flossing/)**, which is basically like the handle of a toothbrush, but with floss on the top. These are fantastic, I use one myself. They turn flossing into a one-handed operation and are awesome for multi-taskers — you can flip through your phone with one hand while flossing with the other.

**Take the pressure off.** Don’t do what the hygienist tells you, which is, floss every day. This can be too much of a jump and too much to expect right of the bat. It’s easy to get frustrated when trying to get in the habit of flossing, especially since so much coordination is involved with it.

What I tell my patients is, floss once a week. What ends up happening is they floss once, and a few days later, begin to crave the feeling again. When you floss once, you get sensation of the separation of the teeth, stimulation of the gums — it’s a distinct feeling, almost like a massage. Which is why you’ll crave it again. This can be a much better way to break into the habit of flossing daily.

You can think of flossing like kicking over an anthill each day. You can kick the anthill to destroy it, but each day, the ants come back and build a new one. Flossing one week before your appointment with the hygienist isn’t going to prevent gum disease, tooth decay, and gum recession — but keeping up with that “anthill” and flossing daily, will.

_From: [https://askthedentist.com/how-to-make-flossing-a-habit/](https://askthedentist.com/how-to-make-flossing-a-habit/) (Last updated on June 26, 2018)_

Don't Floss, Pick
For years it was drilled into my head that that only way I was not going to end up toothless was the dedicated, almost religious, practics of flossing after every meal and brushing for at least two minutes with fluoridated toothpaste only, of course.

So, when I first heard the rumor that flossing may not actually be helping your teeth at all, it was like learning that there is no Santa Claus. Unlike the existence of Santa Claus, however, somewhere out there on the Internet there must be a research study or something that proves the effectiveness of the wonder of flossing.


{% youtube "https://www.youtube.com/embed/zXHTeG17Yag" %}
#### _8 Effective Ways to Remove Plaque in Five Minutes: If you are serious about dental hygiene, watch this video_

Nope! In fact, there are pathetically few research studies at all on the flossing. The most comprehensive report is a meta-analysis of the existing studies [1] which concludes...

There is weak, very unreliable evidence from 10 studies that flossing plus toothbrushing may be associated with a small reduction in plaque at 1 and 3 months. No studies reported the effectiveness of flossing plus toothbrushing for preventing dental caries.

On top of that, I learned that very few flossing threads are actually gum-compatible, which raises the risk of gum damage. The miracle of flossing was beginning to look more a subversive plot against people with nice teeth.

Now, nervous that years of flossing were not helping my teeth and ruining my gums I made an appointment with my dentist to get a check-up, just to assess the damage of my decades if ill-informed flossing. I was also a bit annoyed that he was not forthcoming with this info long ago.

When confronted with my prosecutorial litany of allegations and the evidence, he somewhat sighed, as if he had just been caught lying, and pretty much fessed up that, yeah, flossing is not that useful for *my* teeth, but I should still keep doing it! Was my dentist a Manchurian Candidate for the American Dental Association!?

He went on to explain that, in my case, flossing was not that effective because I do not have extremely tight teeth, meaning that there is space between my teeth and gums to insert a dental pick, in which case he suggested I replace flossing with a dental pick as they are more effective in removing plaque. Teeth that are not tight get little benefit from flossing as the good bacteria and protein in the mouth do an effective job of protecting the teeth if they can into the gaps. People with tight teeth who can not use a pick will get some benefit from floss.

Ultimately, he said, it comes down to genetics[3]. Some people are lucky enough to have proteins in their saliva that protects tooth enamel from sugar, making them less suspectable to tooth decay than those who never touch sugar[2]. This is also the case for other mouth related issues such as periodontal (gum) disease, oral cancer, misaligned teeth, and cleft palate.

Back to the question "So, doc, why should I keep flossing?" Well, for one thing, flossing (or dental picks if you don't have tight teeth) helps prevent heart disease! What!? Yes, it seems that gum disease and heart disease are kissing cousins, and where there is one, there is often the other because they both have the same genetic source, for example, the FAM5C gene.

This nasty gene is associated with myocardial and cerebral infarctions, periodontitis, vascular inflammation, and a bunch of other stuff you hope you never have to know more about.

In addition, gum diseases are often known to cause stroke, birth of low weight babies, and a weakened immune system, which can bring on many more problems. The good news for women is they tend to be less susceptible to these ailments than men.

**In summary: Use dental picks, (if you can) and blame your ancestors for everything.**

p.s. For Third Agers, prevention of dry mouth is one of the other common advantages of picking/flossing.

Saliva is one of the best natural disinfectants and without saliva, bacteria gets a chance to affect gum and teeth. Third Agers are more prone to dry mouth, as there are medicines which are likely to make the mouth dry and cause different oral diseases. When there is insufficient saliva secretion, picking/flossing helps in removing the food bits and bacteria that the diminished saliva will be insufficient to combat.

_References_

* [1] Flossing to reduce gum disease and tooth decay, [https://www.cochrane.org/CD008829/ORAL_flossing-to-reduce-gum-disease-and-tooth-decay](https://www.cochrane.org/CD008829/ORAL_flossing-to-reduce-gum-disease-and-tooth-decay)
* [2] There is also research to the contrary -> [https://www.abc.net.au/news/science/2017-09-14/you-cant-blame-genes-for-tooth-decay-australian-twin-study-shows/8899834](https://www.abc.net.au/news/science/2017-09-14/you-cant-blame-genes-for-tooth-decay-australian-twin-study-shows/8899834)
* [3] Caries: Review of Human Genetics Research, [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4167926/](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4167926/)
* [4]Susceptibility for caries, gum disease found in genes, [https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2010/04/100415110037.htm](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2010/04/100415110037.htm)
