---
layout: post
author: jeff_admin
title: The Ideal Diet for Humans
featured: true
hidden: true
tags:  [body,diet,health,lifestyle,video]
permalink: ideal-diet-humans-galit-goldfarb-tedxwilmington
categories: [knowledge]
image: assets/images/posts/knowledge//KN-319-banner.jpg
postnum: 319
intro: Humans have evolved to eat certain foods.  Do you know what they are?
---
# The Ideal Diet for Humans.

 {% youtube "https://www.youtube.com/embed/2wG3b3ql34A" %}

TEDx.  Galit Goldfarb begins with her own story -- becoming bulimic as a
teen, and determining to learn all she could about science and nutrition in
college, and yet still not achieving health.  She studied medical science,
opening a clinic after her return.  But everyone she treated felt better
only in the short-term.  She was also diagnosed with cancer.  She began to
learn all about human health, reading from all the scientific fields until
she was able to understand the answer: the guerilla diet (food choices that
fight back against everything she had learned!).  Goldfarb takes us through
ancient human history, demonstrating evidence of the earliest humans' health
and diet (living into their 70s and eating plants, nuts, fruits, and
legumes) and how humans moved shortsightedly away from that diet.  Cancer
free (without radiation), her final argument is simple -- while an
"omnivore" diet may in the short term taste better, in the long term, it is
unhealthy, not only for us but for our planet.  Galit Goldfarb has worked
within the health field for over 22 years.  While working in different
research laboratories and with many private clients, Galit has written eight
books in the fields of health and personal development, including #1
International Bestseller “The Guerrilla Diet & Lifestyle Program” based on
her in-depth research into the ideal diet for humans.  Galit is a
Professional member of the American Nutrition Association, and the American
Society for Nutrition, and holds a BSc (honours) in Biochemistry and
Nutrition, an MSc in Medical Science with Distinction, and studied
Immunology for a Post Graduate Certificate.  Galit is currently doing her
PhD in Nutrition.  Galit offers workshops, speaking engagements, online
programs and coaching to help people achieve optimal health.
